Add math tutorials to the main tutorials branch (#1910)
ansys/pydpf-core: doc/source/user_guide/tutorials/mathematics/basic_maths.rst

.. |pow_fc| replace:: :class:`pow_fc<ansys.dpf.core.operators.math.pow_fc.pow_fc>`
.. |sqr| replace:: :class:`sqr<ansys.dpf.core.operators.math.sqr.sqr>`
.. |sqr_fc| replace:: :class:`sqr_fc<ansys.dpf.core.operators.math.sqr_fc.sqr_fc>`
.. |norm| replace:: :class:`norm<ansys.dpf.core.operators.math.norm.norm>`
.. |norm_fc| replace:: :class:`norm_fc<ansys.dpf.core.operators.math.norm_fc.norm_fc>`

This tutorial explains how to do some basic mathematical operations with PyDPF-Core.

DPF uses |Field| and |FieldsContainer| objects to handle data. The |Field| is a homogeneous array and
a |FieldsContainer| is a labeled collection of |Field|. Thus, when making mathematical operations with the data, you
manipulate |Field| and |FieldsContainer|.

:jupyter-download-script:`Download tutorial as Python script<basic_maths>`
:jupyter-download-notebook:`Download tutorial as Jupyter notebook<basic_maths>`

Create the Fields and FieldsContainers
--------------------------------------

DPF uses |Field| and |FieldsContainer| objects to handle data. The |Field| is a homogeneous array and
a |FieldsContainer| is a labeled collection of |Field|.

> Here, we use |Field| and |FieldsContainer| created from scratch to facilitate the understanding on how the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, we use |Field| and |FieldsContainer| created from scratch to facilitate understanding of how the
```

> mathematical operators works. For more information on creating a |Field| from scratch check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mathematical operators work. For more information on creating a |Field| from scratch check
```

:ref:`ref_tutorials_data_structures`.

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: Fields

>         Create the Fields by defining:

Reviewer 2: Maybe use lowercase here or the |Field| option?

```suggestion
        Create the fields by defining:
```

>         Create the Fields by defining:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Create the fields based on:
```

>         - The number of entities;
>         - The entities ids and location. Thus, the |Field| scoping

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - The number of entities
        - The entities ids and location. Thus, the |Field| scoping
```

            - If not specified, the location is *'nodal'* by default.

>             - Each entity (here, the nodes) must have a |Scoping| id. The ids allows DPF to apply an operator on the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            - Each node must have a |Scoping| id. The ids allows DPF to apply an operator on the
```

>         - The entities ids and location. Thus, the |Field| scoping
> 
>             - If not specified, the location is *'nodal'* by default.
>             - Each entity (here, the nodes) must have a |Scoping| id. The ids allows DPF to apply an operator on the
>               corresponding entities. For more detailed explanation about the influence of the |Scoping| on the operations,
>               see the :ref:`ref_basic_maths_scoping_handling` section on this tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - A list of IDs and a location, which together define the scoping of the field:

        The location defines the type of entity the IDs refer to. It defaults to *nodal*, in which case the scoping is
        understood as a list of node IDs, and the field is a nodal field.
        
        For a more detailed explanation about the influence of the |Scoping| on the operations,
        see the :ref:`ref_basic_maths_scoping_handling` section of this tutorial.
```

        Import the necessary DPF modules.

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Import the ``ansys.dpf.core`` module
            from ansys.dpf import core as dpf
            # Import the math operators module
            from ansys.dpf.core.operators import math as maths

>         Create the Fields by intanciating the |Field| object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Create the Fields with the |Field| class constructor.
```

>         Create the Fields by intanciating the |Field| object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        Create the fields by intanciating the |Field| object.
```

        .. jupyter-execute::

>             # Instantiate the Fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # Create the fields
```

            num_entities = 2
            field1 = field2 = field3 = field4 = dpf.Field(nentities=num_entities)

>             # Define the scoping ids

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # Set the scoping IDs
```

            field1.scoping.ids = field2.scoping.ids = field3.scoping.ids = field4.scoping.ids = range(num_entities)

>             # Set the data to each Field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # Set the data for each field
```

            field1.data = [1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0]
            field2.data = [7.0, 3.0, 5.0, 8.0, 1.0, 2.0]
            field3.data = [6.0, 5.0, 4.0, 3.0, 2.0, 1.0]
            field4.data = [4.0, 1.0, 8.0, 5.0, 7.0, 9.0]

>             # Print the Fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            # Print the fields
```

            print("Field 1","\n", field1, "\n"); print("Field 2","\n", field2, "\n");
            print("Field 3","\n", field3, "\n"); print("Field 4","\n", field4, "\n")

    .. tab-item:: FieldsContainers

>         Create the FieldsContainers using the |fields_container_factory|.  Here, we use the |over_time_freq_fields_container|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Create the field containers using the |fields_container_factory|.  Here, we use the |over_time_freq_fields_container|
```

        function that creates a |FieldsContainer| with a *'time'* label.

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Create the FieldsContainers
            fc1 = dpf.fields_container_factory.over_time_freq_fields_container(fields=[field1, field2])
            fc2 = dpf.fields_container_factory.over_time_freq_fields_container(fields=[field3, field4])

            # Print the FieldsContainers
            print("FieldsContainer1","\n", fc1, "\n")
            print("FieldsContainer2","\n", fc2, "\n")

> To make the mathematics operations, we use the operators available in the |math operators| module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To perform mathematical operations, we use operators available in the |math operators| module.
```

Their usage is similar, for each operation you must instantiate the operator and use ``.eval()`` method to compute
and retrieve the results.

> Mathematical operations with Fields

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mathematical operations with fields
```

-----------------------------------

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: Addition

        Here, we use:

>         - The 'add' operator for component wise addition
>         - The 'accumulate' operator to find the total sum of each component for all the entities

Reviewer 2: To highlight an inline piece of code, it is better to use backticks:

```suggestion
        - The `add` operator for component wise addition
        - The `accumulate` operator to find the total sum of each component for all the entities
```

Author: ```suggestion
        - The |add| operator for component wise addition
        - The |accumulate| operator to find the total sum of each component for all the entities
```

        **'add' operator**

        This operator computes the sum between the data vectors for the corresponding entity id.

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Add the Fields
            add_field = maths.add(fieldA=field1, fieldB=field2).eval()
            # id 0: [1.+7. 2.+3. 3.+5.]
            # id 1: [4.+8. 5.+1. 6.+2.]

            # Print the results
            print("Addition fields",add_field , "\n")

        **'accumulate' operator**

>         This operator sums all the elementary data of a field to produce one elementary data for each vector component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        This operator computes the total sum of elementary data of a field, for each component of the field.
```

>         You can give a scale ("ponderation") argument.
> 
>          Mind the |Field| dimension: Our |Field| represents 3D vectors, so one elementary data is a 3D vector.
>          The optional "ponderation" |Field| is a |Field| that attributes the values to be multiplied by each data
>          component of the entities. Thus, we need to change its dimensionality (1D).
> 
>         Define the total sum (accumulate) of the components of the given |Field|.
> 
>         .. jupyter-execute::
> 
>             # Find the total sum of the Fields
>             tot_sum_field = maths.accumulate(fieldA=field1).eval()
>             # vector component 0 = 1.+ 4.
>             # vector component 1 =  2.+ 5.
>             # vector component 2 = 3.+ 6.
> 
>             # Print the results
>             print("Total sum fields","\n", tot_sum_field, "\n")
> 
>         Define the total sum (accumulate) of the components of the given |Field| and give a scale factor.
> 
>         .. jupyter-execute::
> 
>             # Defines the scale factor Field
>             scale_vect = dpf.Field(num_entities)
>             # Changes the scale factor Field dimensionality
>             scale_vect.dimensionality = dpf.Dimensionality([1])
>             # Defines the scale factor Field scoping ids
>             scale_vect.scoping.ids = range(num_entities)
>             # Defines the scale factor Field data
>             scale_vect.data = [5., 2.]
> 
>             # Find the total sum of the Field and use a scale vector
>             tot_sum_field_scale = maths.accumulate(fieldA=field1, ponderation=scale_vect).eval()
>             # vector component 0 = (1.0 * 5.0) + (4.0 * 2.0)
>             # vector component 1 = (2.0 * 5.0) + (5.0 * 2.0)
>             # vector component 2 = (3.0 * 5.0) + (6.0 * 2.0)
> 
>             # Print the results
>             print("Total sum fields scale","\n", tot_sum_field_scale, "\n")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        You can give a scaling ("weights") argument.

         Mind the |Field| dimension: Our |Field| represents 3D vectors, so each elementary data is a 3D vector.
         The optional "weights" |Field| attributes a scaling factor for each entity when performing the sum. 
         We thus need to provide a 1D field.

        Compute the component-wise total sum (accumulate) of a given |Field|.

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Compute the total sum of a field
            tot_sum_field = maths.accumulate(fieldA=field1).eval()
            # vector component 0 = 1. + 4.
            # vector component 1 = 2. + 5.
            # vector component 2 = 3. + 6.

            # Print the results
            print("Total sum fields","\n", tot_sum_field, "\n")

        Compute the component-wise total sum (accumulate) of a given |Field| using a scale factor field.

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Define the scale factor field
            scale_vect = dpf.Field(nentities=num_entities, nature=ansys.dpf.core.common.natures.scalar)
            # Set the scale factor field scoping IDs
            scale_vect.scoping.ids = range(num_entities)
            # Set the scale factor field data
            scale_vect.data = [5., 2.]

            # Compute the total sum of the field using a scaling field
            tot_sum_field_scale = maths.accumulate(fieldA=field1, weights=scale_vect).eval()
            # vector component 0 = (1.0 * 5.0) + (4.0 * 2.0)
            # vector component 1 = (2.0 * 5.0) + (5.0 * 2.0)
            # vector component 2 = (3.0 * 5.0) + (6.0 * 2.0)

            # Print the results
            print("Total weighted sum:","\n", tot_sum_field_scale, "\n")
```

            print("FieldsContainer2","\n", fc2, "\n")

.. _ref_basic_maths_scoping_handling :

Effect of the scoping
---------------------

The scoping of a DPF field stores information about which entity the data is associated to.
A scalar field containing data for three entities is for example linked to a scoping defining three entity IDs.
The location of the scoping defines the type of entity the IDs refer to.
This allows DPF to know what each data point of a field is associated to.

Operators such as mathematical operators usually perform operations between corresponding entities of fields.

For example, the addition of two scalar fields does not just add the two data arrays,
which may not be of the same length or may not be ordered the same way.
Instead it uses the scoping of each field to find corresponding entities, their data in each field,
and perform the addition on those.

This means that the operation is usually performed for entities in the intersection of the two field scopings.

Some operators provide options to handle data for entities outside of this intersection,
but most simply ignore the data for these entities not in the intersection of the scopings.

> The following examples are here to better understand this behavior.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following examples illustrate this behavior.
```

.. jupyter-execute::

    # Instantiate two nodal 3D vector fields of length 3
    field5 = dpf.Field(nentities=3)
    field6 = dpf.Field(nentities=3)

    # Set the data for each field
    field5.data = [1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0, 7.0, 8.0, 9.0]
    field6.data = [5.0, 1.0, 6.0, 3.0, 8.0, 9.0, 7.0, 2.0, 4.0]

    # Set the scoping IDs (here node IDs)
    field5.scoping.ids = [1, 2, 3]
    field6.scoping.ids = [3, 4, 5]

    # Print the fields
    print("Field 5", "\n", field5, "\n")
    print("Field 6", "\n", field6, "\n")

Here the only entities with matching IDs between the two fields are:

- The third entity in field5 (ID=3)
- The first entity in field6 (ID=3)

> Other entities are thus not taken into account when using an operator that needs two operands.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Other entities are not taken into account when using an operator that needs two operands.
```

    # This behavior is specific to each operator.
    print(add_scop, "\n")

Or the |generalized_inner_product| operator:

.. jupyter-execute::

    # Use the dot product operator
    dot_scop = dpf.operators.math.generalized_inner_product(fieldA=field5, fieldB=field6).eval()
    # ID 3: (7. * 5.) + (8. * 1.) + (9. * 6.)

    # Print the result
    # The operator returns zero for entities where no match is found in the other field.
    # The resulting field is the size of the union of the two scopings.
    # This behavior is specific to each operator.
    print(dot_scop,"\n")
    print(dot_scop.data,"\n")

.. _ref_basic_maths_handling_of_collections :

Handling of collections
-----------------------

Most mathematical operators have a separate implementation for handling |FieldsContainer| objects
as input, and are recognizable by the suffix ``_fc`` appended to their name.

These operator operate on fields with the same label space.

Using the two collections of fields built previously, both have a *time* label with an associated value for each field.

Operators working with |FieldsContainer| inputs match fields from each collection with the same value for all labels.

> In our case, ``field 0`` of ``fc1`` with label space ``{"time": 1}`` gets matched up with ``field 0`` of ``fc2`` also with label space ``{"time": 1}``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case, ``field 0`` of ``fc1`` with label space ``{"time": 1}`` gets matched up with ``field 0`` of ``fc2`` also with label space ``{"time": 1}``.
```

Then ``field 1`` of ``fc1`` with label space ``{"time": 2}`` gets matched up with ``field 1`` of ``fc2`` also with label space ``{"time": 2}``.

Addition
--------

> Here, we use:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use:
```

            # id 0: [1.+7. 2.+3. 3.+5.] = [ 8.  5.  8.]
            # id 1: [4.+8. 5.+1. 6.+2.] = [12.  6.  8.]

            # Print the results
            print("Addition field ", add_field , "\n")

    .. tab-item:: *add_fc*

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Add the two field collections
            add_fc = maths.add_fc(fields_container1=fc1, fields_container2=fc2).eval()
            # {time: 1}: field1 + field3
            #           -->      id 0: [1.+6. 2.+5. 3.+4.] = [7. 7. 7.]
            #                    id 1: [4.+3. 5.+2. 6.+1.] = [7. 7. 7.]
            #
            # {time: 2}: field2 + field4
            #           -->      id 0: [7.+4. 3.+1. 5.+8.] = [11. 4. 13.]
            #                    id 1: [8.+5. 1.+7. 2.+9.] = [13. 8. 11.]

            # Print the results
            print("Addition FieldsContainers","\n", add_fc , "\n")
            print(add_fc.get_field({"time":1}), "\n")
            print(add_fc.get_field({"time":2}), "\n")

Overall sum
^^^^^^^^^^^

This operator computes the total sum of elementary data of a field, for each component of the field.
You can give a scaling ("weights") argument.

>  Mind the |Field| dimension: Our |Field| represents 3D vectors, so each elementary data is a 3D vector.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 Keep in mind the |Field| dimension. The |Field| represents 3D vectors, so each elementary data is a 3D vector.
```

>  The optional "weights" |Field| attributes a scaling factor for each entity when performing the sum.
>  We thus need to provide a 1D field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 The optional "weights" |Field| attribute is a scaling factor for each entity when performing the sum,
 so you must provide a 1D field.
```

            print("Total weighted sum:","\n", tot_sum_field_scale, "\n")

    .. tab-item:: *accumulate_fc*

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Total scaled sum of the two field collections (accumulate)
            tot_sum_fc_scale = maths.accumulate_fc(fields_container=fc1, weights=scale_vect).eval()
            # {time: 1}: field1
            #           -->      vector component 0 = (1.0 * 5.0) + (4.0 * 2.0) = 13.
            #                    vector component 1 = (2.0 * 5.0) + (5.0 * 2.0) = 20.
            #                    vector component 2 = (3.0 * 5.0) + (6.0 * 2.0) = 27.
            #
            # {time: 2}: field2
            #           -->      vector component 0 = (7.0 * 5.0) + (8.0 * 2.0) = 51.
            #                    vector component 1 = (3.0 * 5.0) + (1.0 * 2.0) = 17.
            #                    vector component 2 = (5.0 * 5.0) + (2.0 * 2.0) = 29.

            # Print the results
            print("Total sum FieldsContainers scale","\n", tot_sum_fc_scale , "\n")
            print(tot_sum_fc_scale.get_field({"time":1}), "\n")
            print(tot_sum_fc_scale.get_field({"time":2}), "\n")

Subtraction
-----------

> Here, we use the |minus| operator to compute the element-wise difference between each component of two fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the |minus| operator to compute the element-wise difference between each component of two fields.
```

            # id 0: (1. * 7.) + (2. * 3.) + (3. * 5.) = 28.
            # id 1: (4. * 8.) + (5. * 1.) + (6. * 2.) = 49.

            # Print the results
            print("Dot product field","\n", dot_prod_field , "\n")

    .. tab-item:: *generalized_inner_product_fc*

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Generalized inner product of two field collections
            dot_prod_fc = maths.generalized_inner_product_fc(field_or_fields_container_A=fc1, field_or_fields_container_B=fc2).eval()
            # {time: 1}: field1 X field3
            #           -->      id 0: (1. * 6.) + (2. * 5.) + (3. * 4.) = 28.
            #                    id 1: (4. * 3.) + (5. * 2.) + (6. * 1.) = 28.
            #
            # {time: 2}: field2 X field4
            #           -->      id 0: (7. * 4.) + (3. * 1.) + (5. * 8.) = 71.
            #                    id 1: (8. * 5.) + (1. * 7.) + (2. * 9.) = 65.

            # Print the results
            print("Dot product FieldsContainer","\n", dot_prod_fc , "\n")
            print(dot_prod_fc.get_field({"time":1}), "\n")
            print(dot_prod_fc.get_field({"time":2}), "\n")

Overall dot product
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The |overall_dot| operator makes two manipulations to give the result:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The |overall_dot| operator creates two manipulations to give the result:
```

> - it first computes a dot product between data of corresponding entities for two vector fields, resulting in a scalar field

Reviewer 3: Changed to numbered list since these are done in order.

> - it first computes a dot product between data of corresponding entities for two vector fields, resulting in a scalar field
> - it then sums the result obtained previously over all entities to return a scalar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. it first computes a dot product between data of corresponding entities for two vector fields, resulting in a scalar field
2. it then sums the result obtained previously over all entities to return a scalar
```

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: *overall_dot*

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Overall dot product of two fields
            overall_dot = maths.overall_dot(fieldA=field1, fieldB=field2).eval()
            # id 1: (1. * 7.) + (2. * 3.) + (3. * 5.) + (4. * 8.) + (5. * 1.) + (6. * 2.) = 77.

            # Print the results
            print("Overall dot","\n", overall_dot , "\n")

    .. tab-item:: *overall_dot_fc*

        The ``overall_dot_fc`` operator is not available.

Division
--------

> Here, we use the |component_wise_divide| operator to compute the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the |component_wise_divide| operator to compute the
```

            # id 0: [1./7. 2./3. 3./5.] = [0.143 0.667 0.6]
            # id 1: [4./8. 5./1. 6./2.] = [0.5 5. 3.]

            # Print the results
            print("Component-wise division field","\n", comp_wise_div , "\n")

    .. tab-item:: *component_wise_divide_fc*

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Component-wise division between two field collections
            comp_wise_div_fc = maths.component_wise_divide_fc(fields_containerA=fc1, fields_containerB=fc2).eval()
            # {time: 1}: field1 - field3
            #           -->      id 0: [1./6. 2./5. 3./4.] = [0.167 0.4 0.75]
            #                    id 1: [4./3. 5./2. 6./1.] = [1.333 2.5 6.]
            #
            # {time: 2}: field2 - field4
            #           -->      id 0: [7./4. 3./1. 5./8.] = [1.75 3. 0.625]
            #                    id 1: [8./5. 1./7. 2./9.] = [1.6 0.143 0.222]

            # Print the results
            print("Component-wise division FieldsContainer","\n", comp_wise_div_fc , "\n")
            print(comp_wise_div_fc.get_field({"time":1}), "\n")
            print(comp_wise_div_fc.get_field({"time":2}), "\n")

Power
-----

> Here we use:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use:
```

- the |pow| operator to compute the element-wise power of each component of a |Field|
- the |sqr| operator to compute the `Hadamard power <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hadamard_product_(matrices)#Analogous_operations>`_ of each component of a |Field|
- the |sqrt| operator to compute the `Hadamard root <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hadamard_product_(matrices)#Analogous_operations>`_ of each component of a |Field|

*pow* operator
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The |pow| operator computes the element-wise power of each component of a |Field| to a given factor.

> Here, we compute the power of three.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This example computes the power of three.
```

.. tab-set::

    .. tab-item:: *sqrt*

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Compute the square-root of a field
            sqrt_field = maths.sqrt(field=field1).eval()
            # id 0: [(1.^0.5) (2.^0.5) (3.^0.5)] = [1. 1.414 1.732]
            # id 1: [(4.^0.5) (5.^0.5) (6.^0.5)] = [2. 2.236 2.449]

            print("^0.5 field","\n", sqrt_field , "\n")

    .. tab-item:: *sqrt_fc*

        .. jupyter-execute::

            # Compute the square-root of a field collection
            sqrt_fc = maths.sqrt_fc(fields_container=fc1).eval()
            # {time: 1}: field1
            #           -->      id 0: [(1.^.5) (2.^.5) (3.^.5)] = [1. 1.414 1.732]
            #                    id 1: [(4.^.5) (5.^.5) (6.^.5)] = [2. 2.236 2.449]
            #
            # {time: 2}: field2
            #           -->      id 0: [(7.^.5) (3.^.5) (5.^.5)] = [2.645 1.732 2.236]
            #                    id 1: [(8.^.5) (1.^.5) (2.^.5)] = [2.828 1. 1.414]

            # Print the results
            print("Sqrt FieldsContainer","\n", sqrt_fc , "\n")
            print(sqrt_fc.get_field({"time":1}), "\n")
            print(sqrt_fc.get_field({"time":2}), "\n")

Norm
----

> Here, we use the |norm| operator to compute the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the |norm| operator to compute the
```

.. _ref_basic_math:

===========
Basic maths
===========

.. |Field| replace:: :class:`Field<ansys.dpf.core.field.Field>`
.. |Fields| replace:: :class:`Field<ansys.dpf.core.field.Field>`
.. |FieldsContainer| replace:: :class:`FieldsContainer<ansys.dpf.core.field.Field>`

> .. |FieldsContainers| replace:: :class:`FieldsContainer<ansys.dpf.core.field.Field>`

Author: Hm yes we can make it in a separate file and include it in the beginning of each tutorial. But then it would put references we don't use in some tutorials. Idk if that ok ?
